an iranian nuclear scientist
long suspected of masterminding a secret
atomic weapons program
has been assassinated near tehran mohsen
fakhrizzada
died in hospital of injuries after armed
assassins fired on his car according to
iranian media
chief foreign correspondent philip
williams has more
it happened in a town just outside of
tehran a small town called
absad city it looks like there was an
explosion
and small arms fire which would indicate
that there were people probably on the
ground
it's obviously a well-planned attack and
the iranians
have no doubt about who was involved
here they pointed the finger very
directly at the israelis
the israeli prime minister benjamin
netanyahu a few years ago
actually named the scientists by name
and said remember this name meaning
that there will you know the implication
being that there
there may be news at some point uh
attached to him well some years later
there certainly is and uh from the
iranian point of view
no doubt who did it but uh the israelis
are not saying anything they're
maintaining silence at the moment
so we can only really speculate about
who and who did it and why
but of course if it was the israelis
that did it then the implication would
be pretty simple
that he was heading the iranian nuclear
effort and that he had knowledge he had
deep knowledge
and would be the one person that could
propel that uh program from from
a peaceful program to nuclear bomb and
that's what the israelis have said they
will never allow to happen
he was extremely significant not a
household name of course but extremely
significant he was well known
uh he headed that program uh he was the
leader of the research center in the uh
in the elite revolutionary guard and he
was a leading member of the iranian
nuclear program so a very important man
a man with deep scientific knowledge
and i think if it was israelis involved
in that or whoever it was
it was no doubt that that brought his
downfall because clearly they wanted to
eliminate
somebody uh with the depth of that
knowledge there is of course other
possibilities
that other countries or other
individuals or
or groups could have been involved in
this but
from the iranian point of view the all
the suspicions point towards jerusalem
you've got
the specter at the moment of course of
joe biden coming in as the u.s
president and he has expressed the view
that he
he probably will rejoin in some form or
another
uh the nuclear deal that was hammered
out between the americans
and the europeans ostensibly to control
to stop the spread of a nuclear weapons
program
in iran in exchange for lifting of
sanctions and
various other incentives that program
was abandoned
by uh donald trump uh but uh it then
then i i guess you have to ask the
question particularly as this scientists
work for the revolutionary guards who
act
pretty independently of government in a
sense they are in a sense a law to
themselves
as how they will uh react to um doing a
deal now
with the american admin administ
administration so
it may have those sort of implications
it's a bit early to tell
if it will but certainly what it will do
is absolutely enrage
the iranian government who of course
have had other leaders
um assassinated in various places around
the world
and um you know this this if this is an
israeli attack it will uh
again just uh from the iranian point of
view underlying that uh they
visceral hatred of the israelis and
of course do nothing in terms of
encouraging some sort of
reproach or deal one of indonesia's top
generals has threatened to disband a
hardline islamist group
after its leader vowed to launch a moral
revolution
in the world's most populous muslim
nation habib brazik has angered
authority since returning from
self-imposed exile in saudi arabia
he's generated huge crowds and is being
blamed for
fueling the spread of coronavirus
indonesia correspondent
and barca reports these were the
extraordinary crowds that greeted hubby
razik's return to jakarta this month
from political exile
three years in saudi arabia haven't
diminished the fiery cleric's support
among hardline islamists
two police chiefs were later sacked for
failing to control the crowds
and 80 of raziq's supporters tested
positive for coronavirus
the leader of indonesia's radical
islamic defenders front
already has authorities worried with his
plans for a so-called moral revolution
in the world's biggest muslim nation
and threats of death to those who stand
in its way
are you ready to defend the prophet
ready to defend the prophet
the general in charge of the jakarta
region ordered his forces to remove
banners backing the cleric and even
threatened to have the group banned
don't even try to destroy our unity or
integrity or we'll strike you down
it was habib brzeek who led the mass
rallies in 2016 against jakarta's then
governor a hawk
an ethnic chinese christian who was
later jailed for insulting the quran
his followers are keen to see what his
next move will be
i'm hoping he'll lead muslims with new
ideas against
evil injustice and wrongdoing
with plans for a possible rally next
week to mark the anniversary of the ahok
campaign
security forces are on high alert the
reason
people are concerned about him is
because
he has this ability to mobilize large
numbers of people to turn out on the
streets
indonesia has banned mass events because
of the pandemic
but given the huge crowds raziq has
drawn since his return
authorities are bracing for further
trouble ann barker abc news
returning home a parliament of mast owls
has been discovered
in a part of western australia which is
not usually associated with the bird's
habitat
the discovery in the margaret river
region is the result of years of
dedicated owl spotting
our reporter anthony pantier joined the
al hunters on several expeditions
in bushland on the fringes of the town
of margaret river
are rarely seen marsdale takes flight to
find food
on the other side of town these fluffy
little hatchlings offer up mixed reviews
of what they've had for dinner
as siblings often do they beg all night
long they're going
it must drive the parents mad they're
coming out of that hole there
if not for the dedicated work of
volunteers like boyd wykes
the existence of these magnificent birds
of prey in margaret river
might have gone unnoticed so you can
sometimes hear that from hundreds of
meters away and we were fortunate enough
to
hear that when we were out and about it
was only after long cold and fruitless
nights searching for the mast owl
they finally made an appearance you
can't
wait to sort of get home and say hey
we've seen something that
nobody else has ever seen in south west
wa
volunteers have now identified a handful
of parliaments of marsdales
in and around margaret river but fear
common household rat poisons
could be their biggest threat
so we're in bushland not too far from
town and we've just come across these
two
juvenile marsdales beginning their
nightly ritual of begging or screeching
for food
now mum and dad aren't too far away so
i'm talking softly so it's not to deter
them from returning with that
all-important meal
now the birds can't see our red lights
but they can detect our presence
and they do that by bobbing their heads
from side to side
effectively expanding their field of
view
now it's certainly late and it's very
cold but it's detections
like this so close to town that's
encouraged the local shire householders
and some
businesses from changing approach to
baiting and hopefully
keeping these birds safe from harm
as part of our contract with our pest
controllers you know we've specified
what kinds of poisons
they they need to use a local wine maker
went a step further
eliminating the poisons and encouraging
ours to move in to act as pest
controllers
you know that would be amazing result if
we could get a family of ours living
there that
actually give us a natural control of
our rodents without having to
do anything else basically so you know
the old story working with nature rather
than trying to control it so little is
known about marsdale populations around
australia they're actually listed under
three different conservation statuses
vulnerable threatened and endangered
this renewed recognition of their
significance gives those populations the
best chance they have
of returning to healthy numbers i
suspect it's the only
time in australia that an area has been
called how
friendly to look after its wildlife from
from an issue that really we shouldn't
have a wise approach to welcome more
feathered friends
anthony pancia abc news margaret river
time now for sport with louise ransom
[Music]
australia can wrap up the odi series
against india with a win at the scg
tomorrow after a comfortable
66-run victory in sydney last night the
opening partnership from dave warner and
captain aaron finch set the platform
warner made 69 off 76 balls while finch
top scored with 114.
steve smith was back to his brilliant
best with a pacey sentry as well
105 runs from just 66 deliveries
glenn maxwell hit a quick fire 45 from
19 balls
helping the hosts to a title of six for
three hundred
and seventy-four in reply shook a darwin
and mayak agarwal
rocketed india to none for 53 after five
overs
india captain virat kohli was lucky to
survive
after adam sampa dropped this catch now
kohli didn't last much longer though as
the tourists
crashed to four for 104 in the 14th over
darwin and padger were the shining
lights in india's innings
making 74 and 90 respectively
zampa's spin bowling was effective
though finishing with figures of four
for 54. yeah i've been searching for
something for
a couple of months now um unfortunately
i haven't been able to find it but um
it was about three days ago something
just clicked and i started to hit the
ball where i wanted to
and everything just my rhythm came back
and everything came back so
i was pretty happy with that so yeah
nice to contribute today i thought vinci
and davey played exceptionally well up
top and just set the platform and then
we could come in and just be quite
aggressive and take the game on and um
yeah fortunately came off tonight really
i think we got enough time to prepare
i don't think there are any excuses on
the field when you don't pull up as a
side
um and i think everyone needs to show
that intent on the field
throughout the 50 overs probably the
first uh long game that we've played in
a while we've been playing t20 cricket
and
you know that can have an effect on the
guys spending more time in the field
after a long time but having said that
we've all played so much odi cricket in
the past that it's not something
which we don't know how to do so i think
yeah the body language in the field i
think
after about 25-26 hours wasn't that
great and that was the most
disappointing part and when you don't
take your chances obviously
against the quality time they're gonna
quality side they're gonna
come out there and hurt you which is
exactly what happened today
in women's cricket sydney thunder
captain rachel haynes says her side's
large contingent of young players will
be the key to winning tonight's wbbl
final
against the melbourne stars the stars
qualified for their first appearance in
the decider with a seven wicket win over
the perth scorchers
while the thunder advanced to their
second decider with a 12-run victory
over the brisbane heat
haines says with a number of older
players retiring after last season
the younger replacements have stood up
this year and while she's wary of the
threat the stars pose led by australia
captain meg lanning
hayne's confidence in her side is high
yeah we've got a lot of respect for the
melbourne stars i've obviously got some
world-class
all-rounders but you know from my point
of view i don't really look at it
like that i think you know we've shown
that our skills can match up against any
team in this competition so
yeah it's anyone's game in it in a final
in a big match you saw that you know
pressure can make people do funny things
and
um yeah we're looking forward to the
contest
in rugby league james graham has ended
his career on a victorious night with
saint helens winning a dramatic uk super
league grand final
the former canterbury and st george
illawarra forward who returned to
england earlier this year
has helped the saints edge out fierce
rivals wigan eight
to four in the decider in hull lachlan
coote kicked two penalties and wiggins
jake bibby scored a try extra time was
imminent with the score locked at four
all before teenager jack wellsby scored
the winning try
after the full-time siren following an
attempted
long-range field goal from tommy
makinson that bounced back off the
upright to claim a thrilling win
having the youngest player in the field
scored the winning try in such
sensational fashion
gave saints england and great britain
legend graham an emotional farewell
the victory is also a triumph for the
saints australian coach
christian wolf in formula one there was
a bit of drama during the opening two
practice sessions of the bahrain grand
prix
australia's daniel ricardo was fifth
fastest and happy with his efforts
claiming it could be a two-stop race
tomorrow meaning strategic possibilities
could open up for a number of teams
newly crowned world champion lewis
hamilton was quickest in his mercedes
all the mechanics at red bull will be
working overtime to get
alex albon's car ready for p3 and
qualifying tonight
and this wasn't the only reason p2 was
red flagged have a look at this
oh it's a dog on the track again i just
saw
well we had uh a dog on the track just
before
uh practice in turkey and now we've got
one in there in bahrain
it's the heading for the barrier though
that's a well-trained dog absolutely
lovely well he's not a well-trained dog
he shouldn't have been there in the
first place
he's trying to make the best of a bad
job is what you mean
[Music]
on the satellite image troughs are
triggering showers and storms in
northern wa and the nt another trophy is
directing intense heat across central
australia to south australia northern
victoria
and western queensland with a few storms
about victoria
high pressure ridges cover southern
queensland
and southwest wa looking around the
country for tomorrow
hot to very hot conditions in southwest
and southern queensland
with a chance of showers and
thunderstorms in the northwest far north
and southwest
new south wales and the act hot to very
hot with a chance of late showers or
storms in the east
mostly sunny elsewhere and elevated fire
danger
in victoria showers about the south and
across the ranges
warm in the north to tasmania rain
easing contracting to the west and
northeast
mostly clearing by the afternoon very
hot temperatures continuing in the far
northeast some early showers over the
southeast
and storms in the northeast of south
australia
for western australia showers and storms
over the kimberley eastern pilbara
far northeast gascoigne interior and the
northern goldfields
and in the northern territory very hot
in the south mostly sunny in the
southern lassiter southern simpson
and eastern arnhem districts a chance of
showers and storms elsewhere
now to monday's forecast for the capital
cities hot and sunny in sydney
finding brisbane morning showers in
melbourne early rain in hobart
partly cloudy in canberra perth and
adelaide and a possible storm in darwin
that is the latest from abc news
remember you can keep up to date
at news.abc.net.edu and also on abc iq
i'm miriam cora with thank you for your
[Music]
company
[Applause]
[Music]
it is really a remarkable achievement in
a very short period of time a covert
vaccine
it literally is building the airplane
you know as you take off
the runway how it will change your life
yes i would be comfortable
taking these vaccines and when will you
get it in three or four months we're
likely to have a substantial
portion of our population vaccinated
because we need to vaccinate
billions of people we're going to need
every drop of every vaccine that is
effective
7 30 next week abc and eye view
celebrating 75 years of covering life on
the land i'm the only abc reporter for
hundreds of kilometers
in a special episode head off the beaten
track with abc's rural reporters
you've got the table all set up for me
what happens out here
maddox see how far we've come he's one
of the modern fathers of australian
agriculture and horticulture
and where we're going you've really got
to be a jack of all trades up here
landline tomorrow 12 30 on abc and iview
grandstand summer of cricket is here
live and ad
as australia face-off against fierce
rivals india
get all the action from the one day
internationals the t20s
and the test series grandstand summer of
cricket
live on abc radio and the abc listen app
watch abc news live stream anywhere
anytime
on abc iview keep up to date with the
latest
breaking stories from around the corner
and across the globe
and you can catch up on all your
favorite abc news and current affairs
programs
head to abc eye view and live stream abc
news now
this week on news breakfast powder
finger front man bernard fanning joins
us to talk about the return of live
music
including the arena show he'll be
headlining in march
and 5 6 7 8 they gave us one of the ear
worms of the 90s i'll be speaking to
british band steps all the way from the
uk
see you then
[Music]
hello and welcome to the breakfast couch
i'm paul kennedy and i'm madeline morris
coming up
[Music]
honoring a legend archie roach on his
entry into the aria hall of fame
culinary queen nigella lawson on
creating a scrumptious treat
in lockdown hello
a warning to our viewers that this next
story will mention the name and show
images of an indigenous person who has
died
music legend archie roach was inducted
into the aria hall of fame
at last night's awards 30 years after
releasing his groundbreaking debut album
charcoal lane to celebrate the album's
anniversary he re-recorded the tracks
and released
a reimagined album the songs of charcoal
lane this
year including his renowned single took
the children away
they took us from our family
he took us away
they took us away
snatched from our mother's breast said
this is for the best
who took us away and we're pleased to
say the
great archie roach joins us now on news
breakfast archie good morning to you
good morning congratulations on several
aria awards last night you keep racking
them up including getting into the hall
of fame what does that mean
to you very nice
i know it's a it's a big honor and you
know
after all these years you know 30 years
still
till playing music and recording uh
it's a great honour and to be recognized
that's for sure
yeah well we spoke earlier this year
about your the 30-year anniversary of
that
breakthrough album uh those beautiful
songs but you've just one male artist of
the year as well so
in in in some ways you're in your prime
you've written a book
and released another album uh it's been
a remarkable year for you
it has it's it's amazing that you know
um
that this year before you know before um
kyle would hit you know
the cover 19 uh just um
through everything hit everybody for six
um
yeah and then even through that i still
managed to do
to do to do so much so
yeah man so i'll give my manager pat on
back to jill sheldon
and just be around able to do that yeah
and uh i note that in your acceptance
speech you had your great mate paul
kelly there with you and you moved him
to tears
uh not not for the first time i suspect
[Music]
no no like they pull out actually we go
go that long
[Music]
used to but it's good to see him
catch up with him when i can when you
sang those songs recently we just played
a clip of
you singing um take the children away
when
30 years later and i i heard you i read
a quote saying that
in some ways you i think you were
singing it in in a room in your house
uh overlooking the yard in some ways
that was the best way to sing it
and and the song gets even better when
you sing it
these days is that true for you yeah
it's you know the
other record uh these songs in in my
home
at my kitchen table where where
a lot of the songs were written actually
at a kitchen table
uh you know in melbourne when we're in
melbourne but
up here on in uh southwest victoria
called the smart country
my mother's area uh and looking at my
backyard just
so relaxed and comfortable and and the
songs the songs that
have grown you know as i've grown
through the years over three so
i had a better idea i think of how to
sing them and interpret them
and of course you've had your health
challenges too aren't you but
how do you how do you um how do you uh
see your voice at the moment it's
um you know when when you hit top notch
it's as good as ever isn't it
yeah when i went ahead yeah when i want
to get those top lights is still as good
it's a little rougher down down you know
in some areas but yeah
that's just over time i suppose some
some of the health problems i've had
there as well yeah and just a quick one
on the archie wrote stolen generation
educational resource
you're not only writing books and
producing music and winning awards
you're still um giving in in that
community area as well
yeah it's great to be able to do the um
the
the resources uh strong generation
resources
you know with other elders and that
talking about you know
getting out truth and and
uh and healing of course heading through
yeah
through whatever way we we we see fit
yeah yeah and just briefly to finish up
you have you um
uh got plenty in you for 2021 what's
your
what's your outlook for the next year if
if
everything goes well and we can move
around and all the rest of it
oh look i i'm you know i'm keen
you know uh just get a few things and uh
yeah
spirit spirit spirit it's always strong
spirit
flesh may be a little little uh
tired and and that but spirit's always
strong yeah so i'm looking forward to
that
next year that's for sure rest up and uh
we hope to see you
out and about again archie roach always
a real thrill to have you on the program
um and everyone at home is thinking the
same thing so
go well and congratulations again on
your hall last night
thanks pk thank you
fanny lumsden has released her third
album i was nominated for seven
golden guitar awards and has been
nominated for the 2020 australian music
prize and to top it all off
she took out the award for the best
country album at last night's arias here
is her
latest fantastic single one
[Music]
so cool down at the bold club fanny
joins us now from puma
in new south wales fanny great to speak
to you this morning and welcome is the
balls club your normal haunt there
um yeah look i actually hadn't been to
that particular one and it was tucked
away the add-a-long bowls club that
i am it was a lifelong dream of mine to
like to combine cracker jack and flash
dance in a regional setting so
and you absolutely nail it hey
congratulations on the award what does
that mean to you to take out the
best country oh it's insane i
um i still don't really believe it
happened i think it's because i'm here
on the farm
and um um well actually the family
fashioned
an award for me but yeah it's
unbelievable um well
did you have a bit of a red carpet there
is that right yeah
yeah yeah we did we um we got a a ream
of red carpet from the local um
carpet in place in water and um and
rolled it out
and um we did our red carpet up on top
of the hill to start with and then
brought it down to the garden for um
before last night so it was great
fanny zan here it's um it looked amazing
on your social media when i was looking
at that red carpet how
how strange was it for you to sort of
recreate the arias
in the tiny town of tumar because it was
a really different arias this year but
for you and your family out on that
massive property did it feel like
australian music's night of nights
it really did look we recreated the best
we could um
you know the free hors d'oeuvres and um
that we've made ourselves
and the free drinks that we paid for
ourselves
no it was um it was a it was a really
fun night it was actually super special
to celebrate it with
my family and friends and you know like
all of these people that have been a big
part of the whole process of the album
having
had to release it from home and um and
actually we recorded it right here in
this stone heart that's right behind me
so yeah it was great um so i mean
this album as you were saying that you
you recorded it at home it was
came out at such an incredible time not
just for covert but also was really
influenced by the
by the fires early in the year tell us
about that
yeah so actually all the behind me um
and all entirely burnt um back in
january this valley was you know
one of the many valleys in australia
that was entirely kind of wiped out and
we had three weeks without power here
and um
uh yeah we've kind of been really
involved in the fire so it had
really a profound impact because the
album and the songs were so influenced
by this
area and these people um i kind of i had
to i had to
like talk about it it had to be
mentioned and and so yeah it became
a lot a big part of the story and we
actually launched the album just down
the hill here
at toma in the rec at the rec reserve
and where we donated all the money that
we made um
to the local bushfire recovery fund so
it's been a
had a huge impact actually in the whole
story that's fantastic yeah it looks so
rich behind you so it's
sprung back to life nicely and uh you'd
be pleased to know
uh fanny that our um our floor manager
joe is doing the exact dance of not that
everyone can see
the exact dance of the uh the lead lawn
bowl guy there
yes it's catching up i think we might
that's good actually
he should put that on social media i
think we're gonna do a competition but i
don't know anyone had beat peter branch
he was
old pete he really just nailed it yeah
well look it's
it's great to speak to you and you must
be really pleased to be back touring
fanny
oh yes it's i am very excited like too
excited
it's very yeah we're back on the road
this weekend so it's very great
well lovely to speak to you thank you so
much and good luck for the golden
guitars and congratulations again
thank you so much thank you
our next guest has been keeping fans
entertained during the pandemic with
videos
of life in lockdown do you want a cup of
tea oh no
coffee black i shouldn't drink milk oh
god why am i so
fat you're so fat i am why
well for a start you eat too much you
drink too much and you take no exercise
darling darling please it's far more
likely to be an allergy to something
isn't it
eddie and patsy i mean i just love it
actually anthony
and tim they have made me laugh so much
over the last six seven months now that
restrictions are easing across the
country
anthony clear is moving that
entertainment
from the screen to the stage with the
national tour next year
here's a bit of what fans will be able
to hear live
[Music]
uh the fittingly titled together again
tour starting in may
and anthony callier joins us on the
couch now good morning welcome
good morning thanks for having me
usually i'm watching you guys at home on
my couch oh it's nice to be here
usually waiting until nine o'clock so i
can take the dog out for a poo so i
don't have to worry about that this
morning what's it like being
out and about oh dog i know i had to put
on a suit this morning
it feels good that's awesome i can't
look let's start with this tour plan
because when did you feel that
the time was going to be right to
actually say i can sell tickets we can
confidently go ahead with this
um i've been working on this for a while
and obviously i was
somewhat taking advice going when can we
put this on sale and so forth and i feel
as though now
there's obviously a light at the end of
the tunnel and there's a bit of hope and
i
and i really wanted to encapsulate the
the essence of
what we should be doing and it should be
coming together again and that's why i
wanted to call the tour
the together again tour and i cannot
wait to kick it off in may next year and
um
to bring the band together again when i
called them and said we're going on too
it was like
kids in candy store yeah i need to get
back on stage christmas
yeah it's going to be great 2021 if
everything goes well and by the way your
music um
as a nod to 2020 seems a bit uh
introspective as well
what's wrong with me a question that a
lot of us have asked when we've had too
much time online
well yeah there was one track called
what's wrong with me and then there was
another track called
lonely um and then the other track was
called shadows so basically when you're
walking around the house by yourself for
the time there's always shadows and
you're feeling very lonely here
and the video was actually filmed in
your place wasn't it
yeah well you know couldn't leave home
so basically i said to my partner i go
get out
the um phone and start filming and we're
filming a video clip and he's like okay
let's do this
right and that of course then gave tim
the impetus to then start doing
some pretty quirky videos yeah well
surprising you every time you walked in
the door
you know like there was no end of it he
had power in the
phone i am sick of being scared every
day in that home like he just jumps out
of every corner in that house and
yesterday i rocked up for a swim at my
local pool and lady goes oh you've got
some great hairs on your
i'm like yeah that's jim
it's lucky you've been able to have a
laugh together but what has been the
hardest thing
of the past year it's um i suppose
having something that you love so much
taken away from you and i didn't realize
and sometimes we take it for granted
like our work and our jobs and
i really didn't realize how how much i
love walking on stage in live
performance and
to literally have someone say you can't
do that for the rest of the year
it was just a really weird feeling but
um you know you have to somewhat go okay
this is a situation
i'm pretty lucky in terms of my life to
be where i
am so i'm not going to sit here and
complain and we sort of just focused on
other things and you know in a
relationship it's sort of you know it
can be testing when you're stuck in a
home
24-17 but it was not always champagne
and
yeah no we only put the good stuff on
social media
espresso martinis that kept us hydrated
that you worry
so a lot of people will be nodding at
home um hearing you say that you've
missed loving what
you do and so many people across
australia have done that
is there anything that's going to change
in your life as a result of that that
extra
gratitude i guess well i wasn't the most
patient person
normally but i feel as though 2020 has
taught me a little bit of patience
i'm sure i'm going to undo that very
quickly though where else we're getting
to 21. not necessarily no i think
i reckon it's um it's going to be
life-changing whether we have habits
that we'll hang on to now
i wish patience had been one of the
habits that i had adopted in 2020
no you missed that boat did you
now during the pandemic many of us have
indulged in some comfort eating to help
us get through
don't feel guilty okay here's the queen
of comfort eating has gone one step
further
using her time during isolation in
london to
compile a sumptuous new recipe book cook
eat repeat is the latest in a long line
of best-selling books
from the one and only nigella lawson i
caught up with her a little earlier
nigella lawson welcome to news breakfast
thank you how's 20 joining from my
kitchen
well i was going to say you've spent an
awful lot of time there haven't you this
year
yes how's 2020 been
well i'm i feel i've been very fortunate
i'm one of the ones who's
you know had work and i've been safe
so i feel i feel lucky and
inspired yes it's you know it was a it
was a strange thing to be uh
writing this book under lockdown and
in a way it gave me this sense of real
connection with people that
really was important you know and i
i think in that way it's it's sort of
fed me on a num
in a number of ways what do you think
people
have realized during the pandemic about
their attitude to food do you think it's
changed
i think so i think that many people
have realized that it provides
such it can provide such a focus and if
you like
uh something that really connects you to
one another
uh i have i think frankly all my life
you know
my focus is always like on the evening
meal and i think for many people they
realize too
that this was something that by thinking
about what they were going to eat
and and sort of reflecting on that
making this big thing
at the end of the day actually provides
so much sustenance
throughout the day a as a focus and as
something
that perhaps they realize that cooking
it wasn't a showy off thing you weren't
trying to
uh cook as if you were in a restaurant
it really was i think that people
understood
it was just about um
really getting as much pleasure and
you know sustenance physical and
emotional as as possible and i think
that's
i think that's the really important
thing about home cooking
it's it has such emotional resonance
uh as well as being just the sort of
cozy familiar wonderful food we like to
eat
now jelly can i ask you about one of the
recipes in particular that's already
creating a bit of fuss which is the
banana skin and cauliflower
curry yes really banana skin
yeah well yeah i mean in some parts of
the world this probably wouldn't raise
an eyebrow
i had i've got a couple of recipes
for banana bread and one which i also
make is this really sort of luscious
molten pudding and because just because
i can't throw
very very very open honors away and then
i read somewhere that you could eat
banana skins so i thought that's
wonderful i mean that
that really makes me even happier
because i love using up
you know odds and ends and so i tried it
out and i think
it's extraordinary because it was a bit
of a you have to take a bit of a deep
breath you think it's going to taste one
incredibly bananary and also very
fibrous but you soak them
i mean when i soak them i just pour
boiling water a bit of turmeric with a
salt
and by the time it's cold the banana
skins
have softened they don't feel bats off
until you cook them
but they're they're a wonderful texture
they don't taste a banana actually but
they were a wonderful texture and the
sort of
this wonderful sort of padded softness a
bit like
an eggplant skin with a bit of with a
bit more flesh on it
and it soaks up whatever sauce you cook
them in and this is
mine is a very sort of mild curry more
aromatic than hot
but uh i can't stop so many recipes so
many books
where do you keep finding the
inspiration
well i mean to be honest i mean greed
does most of the work because i'm always
thinking what should i eat next
but this was an interesting particularly
i don't know important book for me
because i was really reflecting on
the the flavors i love the ingredients
that i always have to have in my kitchen
and that really is important
nigella we know that you have a lovely
relationship with australia and
you'd normally be hoping to spend a bit
of your well the australian summer
holidays down here so we're sorry
you can't visit not as sorry as i am
yeah we noticed it we've got a bit of
vegemite in the background
you can see how tidy i am with all those
things left out on the counter but i'm
hoping to be back
just as soon as it's you know it's
possible
no jello congratulations on cook eat
repeat it's a wonderful book thank you
thank you
we need to talk about movember thank you
for everyone's feedback by the way which
has been
uh no no a large part it's been quite
negative
uh but i appreciate people telling me
that i need to shave my mustache off
right now
on social media thanks very much for
that feedback but it's not about me
the annual event which is now in its
17th year aims to raise awareness for
men's mental health
and nathan appo is an ambassador for
movember
you might have seen his face up on a few
billboards
yeah and nathan is uh joining me and my
mo bro
on the couch here from brisbane it's not
fair you've you've got the hair to
complement
your magnificent mustache
it definitely does help but um
definitely do not shave it
pk you look amazing you look like a i
think a tom a young tom selly
oh thank you you're doing you're doing
great oh
hang on i think we've got a photo of tom
selleck yeah
not quite nathan thanks anyway mate you
are no
tom selleck my friend oh thanks nathan
you've been doing this for a while
though you've had lots of practice
yeah i have um i've been a mobile for
about six or seven years now and
um you know movember just resonates with
me it's a
passion of mine i work in indigenous
health for uh
an organization called the institute for
urban indigenous health um
our flagship programs uh deadly choices
and it's all about
preventative health and getting in and
seeing your doctor not when you're sick
but uh to get a 715 health check and
we struck up a partnership a few years
back and
um i just sort of know what movember is
about and what it means and
it was just something i had to be a part
of and it's a great campaign
um saving men's lives all around the
world
raising much needed funds and awareness
for men's health and
how can you not um be a part of it and
yeah it's yeah
like i said it's such a inspirational
and and
important cause and you just have to be
a part of it um
it's definitely uh a uh a story and a
campaign that connects us all as men
um but also our most sisters are always
uh standing right by our side
raising funds and awareness for us as
well
nathan thank you very much some
beautiful messages there and i'm
uh i'm pleased that you're up on the
billboards mate that's uh that's that's
a face to promote
well play
david walliams stories sell tens of
millions of copies worldwide and he's
even managing to snag roles that have
already been adapted for the small
scenes
children's book code name bananas is set
in wartime london
and he joins us now david good morning
welcome to breakfast you have to excuse
us we're a bit thrown today because
we've been getting so much good news
here on what's happening with
coronavirus and i'm very conscious that
you
are not getting the same good news over
there but i'm so glad you could join us
that's all right um i'm locked down it's
the evening here i've got nothing
else to do i've got nowhere to go i'm
actually delighted
to be talking to you i'm not missing a
thing
do you have your dogs there for company
though my dogs are here keeping me
company so i do think at this
time thank god for children and dogs
in that order because i'm lucky enough
to be a father to a seven-year-old son
um and he makes life great and my dogs
make life great too so i'm very lucky
i'm not alone my mom for example she's
she's not been able to see anyone
because we're in a lockdown and we've
been locked out for about three and a
half weeks here in the uk
and i'm talking to her every day on a
video call like we are now but it's just
not the same as being able to
hug your mom and everything so it's it's
a difficult situation but we're all
doing our best aren't we because we've
all got to do what we're told
because if we all do what we told the
situation i'm sure will get better
and another thing that is good in
isolation is if you can write
best-selling books tell us about this
this latest one
well i'm very lucky because my job
you know wasn't affected that much by
by being locked down in fact it's kind
of better because the thing you need as
a writer
is time and space so i actually
wrote a lot of code name bananas which i
have right here
in lockdown and it's set in 1940 in
london
my mom and dad lived through the second
world war
um and had lots of stories about it as
did my grandparents so i always want to
try a story about the second world war
but i thought i wanted to write a fun
story because i know it's obviously
quite a heavy subject war and i i like
to write
funny children's books and so it's about
going on the run with a gorilla from
london zoo and uncovering a deadly nazi
plot to kill winston churchill that's
the story of the book so
it's not historically accurate
but um i just wanted to write a real
page turner for kids you know i just
i think when i meet parents and i meet
kids you know
you get a lot of reluctant readers a lot
of people say it's very difficult to get
my son or daughter to read a book
so i kind of think i just want to make
it really really fun
and just turn kids on to reading and um
and so far the book's done really well
and uh i had a couple of weeks at number
one and then barack obama
brought out a book i don't even heard of
him no but he used to be
the president of the united states of
america before the orange man
took over and um anyway his book's now
number one
and uh i'm number two but i couldn't i
was hoping i'd be number one because
if i'm number one if i beat barack obama
barack obama will know who i am
oh name bananas
uh but unfortunately that is not the
case he is
definitely number one but i've had a
great response from readers i've always
had an amazing response in australia and
i'm so gutted because
often every couple of years i get to
come to australia and
meet you guys do the tv shows do the
radio shows and meet the readers
meet all the kids who like reading my
books and do events and stuff and
they're so much fun and you get such a
great
reaction in australia you know i
remember just swimming um
in sydney and just someone swimming past
me and going welcome to australia you
know
people are very proud to be australian
quite rightly and they're proud of their
beautiful country
and they're very very welcoming so i
know your borders are currently closed
but when your borders are open they're
right very much come and visit again
yeah well we'd love to be able to
welcome you back i was just trying to
work out whether barack obama's
daughters might have been
uh a bit old for mr stinky and
gangster granny that was one of my
favorites gangster granny
i think they might have been a bit old
but look this one is a real treat and
it's been so lovely to have you on the
program
today david you can head off to the
right wonderful
thank you see you soon lovely day
everybody take care
that's it for now from the breakfast
couch we'll see you again soon
goodbye
whenever you want wherever you are know
the story with abc news
the most trusted news source get
breaking news updates with live
notifications
plus the latest news from australia and
around the world if the situation
deteriorates the hard border comes back
go to news.abc.net.edu or download the
news app
if we don't learn we are condemned to
make the same mistakes the spanish flew
in australia
it was often called the forgotten
pandemic and the striking parallels
today
they shut the schools and places of
gathering the state shut their borders
straight away amazed at the resemblance
australian story special encore
monday abc abc presents a season of
programs and stories
exploring our environment and seeking
solutions to the climate challenge
your planet on abc tv iview radio
and online abc.net dot a u slash
your planet once a year our great
barrier reef
explodes with new life join us for a
live television special revealing the
secrets of the reef
at the time of its annual mass spawning
event
we'll have experts above and below the
water
and cameras running night and day
looking at the health of the reef and
how it's responding to the challenges of
our time
over two big nights reef live starts
this friday on abc
and eye view know the tradition
cultural bird brings the land back to
life know the reason
the most important thing to me as a
gundankara person is protecting country
for future generations
know the languages reporting from our in
the country larakir country
reporting from ghana country reporting
from pinematic from
larakir countries i'm on your toyota
country from
nepaluna lutrowita for abc news
know the meaning i in this country this
country is me
know the story with abc news
today temperatures saw the country's
southeast swelters through the first
heat wave of the season
we are experiencing a severe heat wave
and expecting that heat wave to continue
into tomorrow
[Music]
also ahead five people arrested in
melbourne accused of conspiring to steal
millions of dollars of child care
payments
south australia records two new
coronavirus cases linked to the adelaide
cluster
that's 14 the slow lane a new slower
pace to take
on the world game
[Music]
hello and welcome to abc news i'm miriam
corowa
the first significant heat wave of the
season is here with temperatures soaring
across parts of new south wales victoria
south australia
and queensland parts of sydney are
facing 40 degree heat with strong
north-westerly winds keeping any coastal
breeze reprieve at bay
jan golding from the bureau of
meteorology says it's expected some
november overnight minimum records could
be broken
in inland new south wales we've had this
pool of warm air
hanging around new south wales and
that's extended to the coastal districts
today
over central and southern new south
wales so we are experiencing
a severe heatwave and expecting that
heatwave to continue into tomorrow
for the sydney area southwards and out
to the inland
and then up into the northeast as well
tomorrow
so with heat waves there's obviously a
few other factors to consider
you know it's hot so fire weather we're
pretty concerned about elevated fire
dangers across the state we're already
seeing severe fire danger through
inland new south wales the river arena
in particular it's very windy out there
already 40 degrees expected to get up to
but also there's the health impact so
there's the fires there's the health
impacts
and and then everyone out on the water
as well you know there's water safety to
consider as well we have seen
some november temperature records um
you know preliminary look at it looks
like um we'll have broken some
records for overnight minimums last
night so heat waves
the defined is really warm overnight
temperatures really warm hot days and
and that means the body
doesn't really get much respite it's
quite quite hard for the body
but yet some places in inland new south
wales
will most likely see their hottest
november
overnight temperature in our records
and there's also most likely a
scattering of
daytime places day-to-day time records
over the next couple of days as well
and in south australia total fire bans
are in place for large areas of the
state with the country fire service
monitoring the far grounds near templars
north of adelaide the fire there was
contained yesterday
but residents have been warned the
district is still smoke affected
flare-ups are possible and they should
avoid entering the immediate area
temperatures are predicted to sit in the
40s for more than 20 towns and cities in
the state
with the top temperature of 47 expected
in central parts
the cfs is urging people to be careful
and follow the bands
we're asking people in all areas of the
state today to be prepared
uh have their bushfire survival plan
updated
and today is the day to enact that
bushfire survival plan to ensure
their family and their friends know what
to do well ahead of a fire starting
and then unfortunately if a fire does
start implement that plan
as quickly as possible because with the
types of conditions we see today
fires will be fast moving and
potentially put communities and lives
that threat
further north tourists are no longer
allowed to travel to queensland's
fraser island due to a large bushfire
that's been burning for six weeks
fire authorities are concerned about
deteriorating weather conditions this
weekend and have restricted travel to
island residents and essential workers
south australia has recorded two new
cases of coronavirus bringing the
parafield cluster
to 33. a child who is a member of the
original
family linked to the cluster tested
positive overnight after returning to
negative tests the other case is a man
in his thirties who was a casual contact
of a previous case
the man and his family will be moved to
a medi hotel
there are 5 800 people currently in
quarantine in adelaide with 19 active
cases of covert 19 in south australia
the prime minister scott morrison has
defended the diversity of australia's
trading relationships as tensions with
china continue to escalate from today
china is imposing steep tariffs on all
australian wine imports
speaking to the new south wales branch
of the liberal party mr morrison
insisted
australia is resilient we are now seeing
and have seen for for some time now the
return to the uncertainties
that australia has always had to deal
with global competition and tensions we
see again
strains on our rules-based order around
the world
all of this requires the careful
engagement of australia consistent with
our values
and our national interests but this is
not new for australia
there's nothing new about this
australians have dealt with these things
before
we have dealt with the economic shocks
of of global oil crises
indeed australia dealt with in the early
70s and it took some time
with the establishment of the european
common market which massively
disrupted australia's trading outlook
and the the markets upon which australia
relied upon
uh for our future but australia adapted
australia got better at what we were
doing
and we're able to create new
opportunities and we're able to move
forward
five people have been arrested in
melbourne accused of conspiring with
family day care providers to steal
millions of dollars of child care
subsidy and coronavirus government
payments
reporter nicole asher joins us now from
melbourne
nicole what details have been provided
about this alleged syndicate
afp speaking today have described this
lavish lifestyle
led by the owner of prime family daycare
services here in melbourne they say that
they
there was uh uh australian and
international properties there was a
maserati and bmws
all owned by 42 year old older ola ooda
and 47 year old amjad shahada
now they're a doncaster east couple
accused of being
at the center of this fraud syndicate
now them
and three others are accused of using
the child care subsidy
and the job keeper payment to defraud
the federal government of up to
15 million dollars now they have said
that prime family day care is one of the
biggest claimants of the childcare
subsidy in australia
and uh in ten simultaneous raids over
this week uh they have uh
established that uh there's
suitable accusations that um they've
stolen money and they have been facing
court but here's what the ifp had to say
earlier
operation iris ayton commenced in
december
19 after a large number of community
reports
of suspicious activity were made to the
department of education
skills and employment and we thank the
community for those reports
and nicole what will be the next steps
in this case
so the five uh faced court and were
given bail this week they're due back in
court in june next year the afp
says that it'll take months to sift
through the tens of thousands of
documents they've seized as part of
those 10 warrants
those warrants happened across
melbourne's northern northern suburbs
and
the sydney suburb of bankstown where an
accountant is based
they're also speaking to 70 people
linked to
the family daycare providers so they're
both educators and families
the afp says there are chances that more
charges will be laid
reporter nicole ascher there in
melbourne
2020 has been disruptive for all
students but especially for those who
live
in one state but go to school in another
water closures meant some boarding
students hunter quarantine to attend
school or study remotely for months
now families want a national plan for
these students so their education
doesn't suffer further in 2021.
here's political reporter kathleen
kolderwood
the lee's sisters are ready to see 2020
come to a close
normally they'd regularly come home to
western victoria from boarding school in
adelaide
but this year they've spent months away
at a time
it's been really hard and just knowing
that we can't get to them if anything
was to go wrong is actually probably the
one thing that really
keeps us up at night so when it was
announced south australia was going into
an urgent lockdown their mother hit the
road
fearing the girls could get stuck if
state borders closed
captioning not
it took available for the russell
siblings to get home from their adelaide
boarding school
they were expecting to have to
quarantine in darwin
upset angry this was my last resort to
have to
send the children and myself into into
the quarantine facility
but that was cancelled when the northern
territory revoked adelaide's status as a
hot spot
it was ms russell's 13 year old twins
first year at boarding school
but they spent all of term two studying
online in darwin
i'm definitely more behind than
girls at my school returning back i knew
and my siblings knew we had to
work really hard to catch up our
indigenous students in particular
have suffered greatly through this
pandemic we've done a
injustice i think to their education
the association for parents of isolated
children says
changes are needed before school starts
next year
a combined approach a collaborative
approach across all jurisdictions and
the federal government
to put in place some national guidelines
the federal minister for regional
education has approached all chief
medical officers
to find a universal solution but the
peak health body says responsibility for
border exemptions
ultimately lies with states and
territories
so while the school year is almost over
the uncertainty remains for boarding
students and their families
kathleen coldwood abc news canberra
[Music]
[Applause]
one of indonesia's top generals has
threatened to disband a hard-line
islamist group after its leader vowed to
launch a moral
revolution in the world's most populous
muslim nation
habib braziq has angered authorities
since returning from self-imposed exile
in saudi arabia
he's generated huge crowds and is being
blamed for fueling the spread of
coronavirus
indonesia correspondent tan barker
reports
these were the extraordinary crowds that
greeted hubby rizzik's return to jakarta
this month from political exile
three years in saudi arabia haven't
diminished the fiery cleric's support
among hardline islamists
two police chiefs were later sacked for
failing to control the crowds
and 80 of raziq's supporters tested
positive for coronavirus
the leader of indonesia's radical
islamic defenders front
already has authorities worried with his
plans for a so-called moral
revolution in the world's biggest muslim
nation and threats of death to those who
stand in its way
are you ready to defend the prophet
ready to defend the prophet
the general in charge of the jakarta
region ordered his forces to remove
banners backing the cleric and even
threatened to have the group
banned don't even try to destroy our
unity or integrity
or we'll strike you down
it was habib brzezig who led the mass
rallies in 2016 against jakarta's then
governor a hawk
an ethnic chinese christian who was
later jailed for insulting the quran
his followers are keen to see what his
next move will be
i'm hoping he'll lead muslims with new
ideas against evil
injustice and wrongdoing with plans for
a possible rally next week to mark the
anniversary of the ahok campaign
security forces are on high alert the
reason
people are concerned about him is
because
he has this ability to mobilize large
numbers of people to turn out on the
streets
indonesia has banned mass events because
of the pandemic
but given the huge crowds raziq has
drawn since his return
authorities are bracing for further
trouble ann barker abc news
iran has confirmed that the country's
leading nuclear scientist has been
assassinated
iranian media is reporting armed gunmen
opened fire
on the car of mulsen fakhrizadeh he is
said
to have died from fatal wounds after
being taken to hospital
iran has accused israel of being
involved in the killing
the u.s president donald trump is
rapidly running out of time and
legal options to advance his argument
that the election was rigged after
suffering another defeat
in the courts greg jennett has more from
washington
donald trump can't really take a trick
in the courts right now the dismissal of
his claims seem to be coming
almost daily and this latest case was
before
a federal appeals court and it
summarily dismissed the appeal which was
based on an earlier ruling in a
pennsylvania court that there had been
multiple forms of irregularity
particularly in the vote counting
processes and a lot of those claims
centered on the access that vote
monitors
or what we would call in australia
scrutineers had
and whether republicans weren't favored
and democrats were favored but the long
story
cut short here is that donald trump just
can't get to advance any argument
because
in this latest federal appeal as in
other court hearings before it
the judges have gone to some lengths to
say there is no merit here you haven't
laid out any specificity to back your
claims
of voting irregularity or to use donald
trump's word
fraud so it's back to square one the
only
remaining step really now is to try to
kick it
up to the supreme court of the united
states the key word there is to try
it's not a given that the supreme court
would
grant uh its attention to be given to
these claims but there have been
some indications via twitter from some
of donald trump's legal team members
that they do intend they say to take
this
to the supreme court next so no luck so
far
but yet they persist there are important
preconditions
that donald trump put on that statement
which actually wasn't really a statement
it was more a response to a journalist's
question
interesting because he hadn't taken any
for three weeks since
election day on the 3rd of november here
so
the question was if joe biden
is granted the win by the presidential
electoral
college would you leave the white house
and the answer was certainly
certainly you know i will but it's the
precondition
there it's the electoral college will it
and when
might it award the victory to joe biden
well pretty much all of that
is going to be stacked up and voted on
on the 14th of december so this leaves
under
three weeks for donald trump to try
to somehow thwart or halt even
the electoral commission process very
very difficult when you consider that
he's had no
luck so far so it was a highly qualified
statement
it appeared yes on face value to say
there is a point at which i would be
prepared to go
and to go quietly but and then there are
a whole lot of buts that he threw in
there
the election's fraudulent i um
there's no way that joe biden got the 80
million votes that
the tally says that he did in the
popular vote and it's almost as if
having said the earlier indication of a
concession that there would be an
acceptance that he'd have to leave the
white house
it's almost as if donald trump had
second thoughts on this because he
subsequently took to twitter
and wrote that biden can only enter
the white house as president if he can
prove that his ridiculous 80 million
votes were not fraudulently
or illegally obtained so it's almost
like he's feeding back
off that journalist question and the
answer that he gave to try and revisit
the argument and say well
i might leave but then i wouldn't unless
we can get all this sorted in the courts
so a tough road to hoe for
donald trump on almost any level
the world health organization says
evaluation of the astrazeneca oxford
university coronavirus vaccine needs to
be based on more than just a press
release
the drug company will conduct a second
late stage trial after doubts were
raised about the 90
level of effectiveness the company
initially announced
scientists have questioned the results
after it emerged some trial participants
received a half dose
followed by a full dose through error
the university semester may be over but
many international students still have a
nervous few months ahead of them
they're one of the hardest hit groups
during the pandemic with many losing
their jobs
and unable to return home food bank
australia has set up an initiative
in melbourne to help international
students experiencing food insecurity
the asia pacific newsrooms and tarzia
salim explains
starting with qriket australia can wrap
up the odi series against
india with a win at the scg tomorrow
after a couple 66-run victory
in sydney last night the opening
partnership from dave warner and captain
aaron finch
set the platform warner made 69 off 76
balls wildfinch top scored with 114.
steve smith was in form with a paisley
century as well 105 runs from just
66 deliveries glenn maxwell hit a quick
545 from 19 balls helping the hosts
to a total of six for 374.
in reply shekau darwin and manak agarwal
rocketed india to none for 53 after five
overs
india captain pirate khali was lucky to
survive after adam zampa dropped this
catch
kohli didn't last much longer though as
the tourists
crashed to 4 for 104 in the 14th over
darwin and pandya were the shining
lights in india's innings making 74
and 90 respectively zampa's spin bowling
was effective though
finishing with figures 4 for 54. yeah
i've been
searching for something for for a couple
of months now um unfortunately
i haven't been able to find it but um it
was about three days ago something just
clicked and
i started to hit the ball where i wanted
to and everything just
my rhythm came back and everything came
back so i was pretty happy with that
um so yeah nice to contribute today i
thought vinci and davey played
exceptionally well up top
and just set the platform and then we
could come in and just be quite
aggressive and take the game on and
yeah fortunately it came off tonight
really i think we got enough time to
prepare
i don't think there are any excuses on
the field when you don't pull up as a
side
and i think everyone needs to show that
intent on the field throughout the 50
overs
probably the first uh long game that
we've played in a while we've been
playing t20 cricket and
you know that can have an effect on the
guys spending more time in the field um
after a long time but having said that
we've all played so much odi triggered
in the past that it's not something
which we don't know how to do so i think
yeah the body language in the field i
think
after about 25-26 hours wasn't that
great and that was the most
disappointing part and when you don't
take your chances obviously
against the quality time they're gonna
quality side they're gonna
come out there and hurt you which is
exactly what happened today
and in women's cricket sydney thunder
captain rachel haynes says her side's
large contingent
of young players will be the key to
winning tonight's wbbl final against the
melbourne stars
the stars qualified for their first
appearance in the decider with a
seven-wicket win over the perth
scorchers
while the thunder advanced to their
second decider with a 12-run victory
over the brisbane heat
yeah we've got a lot of respect for the
melbourne stars i've obviously got some
world-class all-rounders
but you know from my point of view i
don't really look at it like that i
think um
you know we've shown that our skills can
match up against any team in this
competition
so yeah it's anyone's game in it in a
final in a big match you saw that you
know pressure can make people do funny
things and
yeah we're looking forward to the
contest
it happens to the best of us talent and
best intentions quickly fall victim to
our bodies telling us that maybe
it's time to slow down but in canberra
there's now a variation of the world
game at a much
steadier pace
this is walking football and it really
is football as you know it
just played at a slower pace catering
for people of a certain age
it began in england years ago and has
made its way to australia more recently
walking football in canberra has been
around for two years now
started off quite small with about 10
players or so
and now we're at nearly over the 200
mark some have never played football
before
others have enjoyed a long life in the
game i've
been watching football with my dad since
i was a little girl
i played for about 14 years didn't start
till i was 40 years old
i just love football though it's been
particularly useful for adults of all
ages returning to activity from
incapacitating injuries
walking football is aimed at both males
and females over the age of 45
which means by a matter of mere months i
now qualify to give this a go
on a quarter sized pitch games are
played as five on five or six on six as
numbers allow
and with unlimited interchange the only
real restriction being that only the
goalkeeper is allowed inside the
semicircle to maintain the element of
safety
but there's one adjustment people from a
long footballing background
still struggle with passing to people
who can't run
you can't put the ball three yards in
front of them it's got to be
to their feet and regardless of the
experience level the enjoyment factor is
there for everyone
well we play with friends it's all good
for most of our teams back for the
second year so we must be enjoying it
just the camaraderie
and the fact that there's no pressure
unless you want there to be pressure
and it's just it's fun it's just for
everybody should come out and have a go
it's
really good that's the great thing about
football it is a sport that we can cater
for for everyone
it's not just something that caters for
one one type of person
even played at a walking pace this is
actually a pretty good workout
if walking football sounds like your
pace capital football run walking
football competitions in hawker on a
wednesday night
and in morrison on a sunday evening
brent mckay abc news canberra
[Music]
on the satellite image troughs are
triggering showers and storms in
northern wa and the nt another trophy is
directing intense heat across central
australia to south australia northern
victoria
and western queensland with a few storms
about victoria
high pressure ridges cover southern
queensland
and southwest wa looking around the
country for
tomorrow hot to very hot conditions in
southwest and southern queensland
with a chance of showers and
thunderstorms in the northwest far north
and southwest
new south wales and the act hot to very
hot with a chance of late showers or
storms in the east
mostly sunny elsewhere and elevated fire
danger
in victoria's showers about the south
and across the ranges
warm in the north to tasmania rain
easing contracting to the west and
northeast
mostly clearing by the afternoon very
hot temperatures continuing
in the far northeast some early showers
over the southeast
and storms in the northeast of south
australia
for western australia showers and storms
over the kimberley eastern pilbara
far northeast gascoigne interior and the
northern goldfields
and in the northern territory very hot
in the south mostly sunny in the
southern lassiter southern simpson
and eastern arnhem districts a chance of
showers and storms elsewhere
now to monday's forecast for the capital
city is hot and sunny in sydney
finding brisbane morning showers in
melbourne early rain in hobart partly
cloudy in canberra perth and adelaide
and a possible storm in darwin
that is the latest from abc news
remember you can keep up to date at
news.abc.net today you
and on abc eye view i'm miriam coral
stay with us the close of business is up
next
[Music]
[Applause]
it's the final q a of the year and we're
going out with a bang
2020 has changed to all of us nothing
compares with this
it's a different world sometimes for the
worse stop hoarding i can't be more
blunt about it
stop it we didn't realize we were going
to be the problem sometimes for the
better
while i may be the first woman in this
office
i will not be the last and jimmy barnes
will be here to take your questions plus
a special performance
do not miss it that's q a monday 9 35
abc and iview celebrating 75 years of
covering life on the land
i'm the only abc reporter for hundreds
of kilometers in a special episode
head off the beaten track with abc's
rural reporters
you've got the table all set up for me
what happens out here
matters see how far we've come he's one
of the modern fathers of australian
agriculture and horticulture
and where we're going you've really got
to be a jack of all trades up here
landline tomorrow 12 30 on abc and iview
it was a summer that burnt a hole in the
heart of the country
have we lost whole animal cultures now
come the incredible stories of hope
nature will come back it's happening
already and resilience
feels amazing i'm just so stoked to see
this little one
narrated by hugo weaving it will take
many years and much human help wilde
australia
after the fires tuesday 8 30 on abc and
iview
[Music]
so
hello i'm rachel papasoni welcome to
close of business
coming up on the program buyer beware
record flight bookings as borders open
but check your travel escape clauses
carefully
and big business embraces a combination
model of work from home
and the office the hybrid model
really reflects what is needed for the
world as it is now
and i think that that's a really great
thing also on the program the latest
deterioration of trade relations
china to hit australian wine with
tariffs
2020 has been a horror year for airlines
and travel agents and anyone who had a
booking
with all states except western australia
soon to be reunited
with more announcements this week of
borders coming down
there's a renewed sense of optimism
bookings have been breaking records
sending flight centre share price higher
and boosting qantas shares as well but
while everyone is banking on a holiday
glow
travelers could still get stung as
emilia terzon reports
around australia people are booking
flights again my family
are on the gold coast and obviously i've
been kind of stuck in melbourne so
yeah missing them desperately and
excited to get back and see them
way more expensive than i remember it
has been a while since i've
obviously been to the airport but
looking at like a couple hundred bucks
at least each weight of the goldie
but after months locked down in
melbourne he's willing to pay
and so are many others several travel
sites are breaking online sales records
this week
travel stocks buoyed the share market
today as the asx continued on its
nine-month high
[Music]
tourist attractions suffering from the
loss of international tourists are
pinning their hopes on domestic
travelers
absolute relief for all of us and it's
not before time heading into
what's hopefully going to be a
reasonably busy christmas period now
that those borders are open
hopefully with those people starting to
um to trickle in or maybe flooding who
knows
we can look towards heading back towards
a seven day a week operation
this surf school in victoria is also
hoping for a wave of home-grown visitors
i think there's a lot of people who've
got family interstate that they're dying
to get up and go see people too and
hopefully they might stay for a holiday
and go for a surf
but after enduring two lockdowns he's
cautious
the next month or two i really paint the
big picture of where we're
at while domestic tourism can return to
australia's surf destinations just in
time for summer it's a very different
world
borders could open or close due to
outbreaks making it difficult for people
to plan
especially if they're worried about
cancellation
jess had to call off a trip to japan
this year she's now wary of even going
into state
because there's a chance that if a
slight case of covert comes up they've
got to shut it
very fast and her travel insurance has
been deemed invalid due to covert
we haven't lost money because we're very
picky with our insurance but we can't
get the same insurance now
because they've actually cancelled that
insurance the consumer watchdog has seen
soaring complaints about the travel
industry
not refunding bookings during covert
it's a complex situation if you're
thinking at the moment about look should
i book should i not book and one of the
things that we are saying to consumers
is look
be really careful when you're booking at
the moment we know that things can
change at the last minute and suddenly
so if you're going to hand over your
money now to a travel agent or to an
airline
just make sure you're fully aware of
what your rights are
ryan is only booking a one-way ticket to
the gold coast to see his family
i just don't know what's going to happen
when i get there at least if he gets
stuck
he'll be near a beach
sydney airport's ghost town status is
set to change
now that state borders are opening up
the chief executive officer of sydney
airport corporation
jeff culbert told alicia barry the
return of passengers is welcome news
we think the border openings are going
to be huge if you look at the stats
pre-covered the city of melbourne route
was the second busiest route in the
world
the brisbane sydney sydney brisbane
route was around the 10th busiest
route in the world and so we're
expecting a really material
impact on the amount of passengers
coming through
the airport if you look at actually
trips from sydney to queensland city to
victoria combined they represent about
of our total domestic traffic and about
50 percent of all traffic through the
airport
so those two border openings are going
to be huge and what about the retail
offering because of course that does
make up a significant proportion
of your earnings how has the retail or
the tenants been
affected during this pandemic
we've taken a really fair approach with
our retailers and segmented the market
if you're a mum and dad retailer who's
got one store
in the airport then we've actually given
upwards of 100
rent relief recognizing that they just
don't have the capacity to continue
trading uh through through covert given
their lack of size and scale
if you're a larger multinational
retailer than our approach has been to
share the pain
and split the the pain 50 50.
and we've actually only lost three
percent of our retailers through the
whole covert crisis
well this year you've posted a 53
million
half year loss and you were forced to go
cap in hand to the market to raise
two billion dollars how crucial is it
that air traffic gets
up to much more normal levels quickly
again
we did the capital raise because we just
didn't know how long
the pandemic would last for and how deep
it would go
and so we wanted to be able to manage
through regardless of the pace or shape
of the recovery
how long can you ride it out with
international borders closed without
that international revenue coming in
oh we can write it out for a long time
we've got four billion dollars of
liquidity
so we're well positioned to be able to
sustain
operations for as long as it takes we're
looking at a pretty reasonable rebound
over the course of of next year on the
back of some vaccines being rolled out
and then as you get into 22 and 23 we
start to see passenger numbers
normalized
the head of the tourism and transport
forum maggie osmond says it's
international borders that will need to
come down before the sector can recover
your average chinese visitors spent
eight and a half thousand dollars while
they were here
your average australian traveler
probably spends a thousand fifteen
hundred so there's a very big difference
i think for all of us though uh the
issue will be
valuing the reawakening of interest in
our own backyard
and using this as an opportunity to
create new content
that we can test with the locals and
when we do have an international market
again
we're going to have a wonderful new set
of offerings you talk about the need for
international borders to reopen
how long do you think the recovery for
the sector will be
look i think this is a four to five year
recovery period being realistic
uh there are some major events scheduled
for 2023 and i think that's probably our
big kickoff point for a wider
international marketplace
the government at both state and federal
levels have had health at their
you know forefront of their minds in
terms of this process as they absolutely
should and of course the industry
completely backs that
uh we do think now though it's the right
time to start thinking very carefully
about this process
of borders opening and closing and
opening and closing and what the
appropriate triggers might be
you said 2023 is that when you expect
international travel to return to
australia
i think we'll see a staggered approach
to international travel
we'll see probably in the second half of
next year some of the larger asian
destinations
we may see fiji and southern the island
nations and uh potentially new zealand
in the very early part of next year
but it is going to take time and i i'm
not certain when we can predict in terms
of the us
and europe but it's going to take a
significant amount of time
shares in treasury wine estates were
placed in a trading halt on friday
following news china will slap tariffs
on australian wine
the 1 billion export industry is the
latest target of escalating trade
tensions
china's commerce ministry says importers
of australian wine will need to pay a
temporary anti-dumping security deposit
abc china correspondent bill bertolt
joined me
bill these tariffs are a pretty
significant percentage
how much damage is this going to cause
to the australian export sector
well rachel it will devastate
australia's 1.26 billion dollars worth
of
wine sales annually to china but it
might not completely
wipe them out the indications from wine
industry
figures today is that even though
a 160 to 200 or 212 percent tariff
is a brutal blow to australian wine in
the chinese market
it doesn't mean that australian wine
can't compete at all it will just be
incredibly difficult now
to compete against french wine
californian wine chilean wine south
african wine but
nonetheless uh it's it's perhaps not
quite the same as the tariffs on bali
which effectively
wiped out the trade there is some
optimism within the industry that they
can still sell
some wine into china in one way or
another but it
certainly is going to drop off in a big
way
bill the investigation out of china is
still ongoing
do you think this will be the full
extent of the ramifications of that
inquiry
i do suspect that the real reason is
political that this is most likely to do
with the australia-china bilateral
relationship just like all these various
trade strikes on different sectors that
we've seen in recent months
and whether or not the final conclusion
of the inquiry will end up placing
the same level of tariff on australian
wine after it finishes next year
hard to say but it's probably going to
have more to do
with the nature of the political
relationship at that time
rather than being based on what
conclusions
are being presented at this point
[Music]
as restrictions lift employers will need
to tackle the big question
do workers have to return to the office
there are financial
productivity and engagement pluses and
minuses
for workforces at home some employers
are trying to find the best of both
worlds
permanently post covered here's amelia
turzon again
madeleine lucas has loved the perks of
working from home
getting to cook your own lunch when you
feel like it's setting your own hours
being able to exercise before covert the
white collar worker was commuting more
than
two hours a day from her country home to
the office in melbourne
not commuting anymore is actually heaven
but heaven
has a downside i miss the people so much
so much we are all really close at our
office
as restrictions ease madeleine's
employer is giving her
the best of both worlds two days a week
in the office
and three at home i feel so fortunate
to be able to do that two days working
in the office
is the general consensus that seems to
be what the majority of us want
and the agreement is that that time
would be used for
our team beating bonding culture work
you know having deep connective time
strategic time together long term it's
definitely going to be a hybrid mix
hybrid has become a corporate
catchphrase during covert 19.
major employers say covert has proven
just how flexible
a workforce can be i think it's had a
fundamental mindset shift in the way
that leaders
manage their outcomes and the fact that
they don't have to be
watching people micromanaging people to
get their work done
the major bank westpac wants half of its
workforce
that's 20 000 people to take up the
hybrid model
even after a vaccine is available we
really want our people to feel
that they have that flexibility to work
across multiple work hubs so whether
that's the office
whether that is in their home or whether
that's even
leveraging some of our other work sites
like our operations centres
medibank is also going hybrid engagement
levels have been the highest they've
been
we've seen really high levels of team
connection high levels of productivity
and we've seen reduction and absenteeism
and turnover
this will involve a re-jig of floor
plans so the desks they can come up
but for now no permanent closure of
offices
we have redefined the purpose of the
office to really be around a place to go
to for people to connect to collaborate
and to concentrate rather than the place
to go to just because it's monday
and it's not just corporates this
melbourne research facility is going to
allow
hundreds of scientists to do some of
their work from home
permanently the way the staff and the
students here have adapted to
covert has been fantastic and i think
the flexibility will
will end up being great from a
scientific productivity viewpoint
but also fantastic from a work-life
balance viewpoint
it's clear that a long-term shift is
happening but many employers still
haven't worked out who'll pay for all
the costs of working from home
contracts and enterprise agreements
might have to be renegotiated
we're working through all of that at the
moment we haven't made any
final decisions for some workers that's
enough
for now the hybrid model really reflects
what is needed for the world as it is
now
and i think that that's a really great
thing it's a real treat
to be able to spend time in a beautiful
office and time
in your beautiful home turns out for
some being forced to stay home wasn't
too bad
after all the victorian government plans
to rack up record levels of debt
shoveling cash into the covert-stricken
economy as it handed down its budget
this week
spending on infrastructure schools and
tax concessions among others will take
debt to 155 billion dollars within three
years
or about a third of victoria's annual
output
daniel ziffer joined elise morgan after
the budget lockup
a substantial hit to the victorian
economy it contracted
four percent last year essentially 16
billion dollars
wiped off the table the government's tax
take for example was down 10
things like gambling land tax stamp duty
those kind of things just really fell
off as people were forced to stay home
to stop the spread of coronavirus
you know timing isn't it is everything
and in politics
amazing day today victoria exited its
final coronavirus
patient from hospital and the government
got out essentially a
fire hose of cash to douse the flames of
recession
and try and create some green shoots in
the economy yes in
incredible figures coming out of the
victorian government about what
over the over the forward estimates 150
billion dollars in spending coming up 50
billion
in the short term um but essentially it
seems to be the opposite of what we saw
from the federal budget which was very
much
they put the incentives out there for
business wants to hire
there's some incentives there this is
very much trying to
push demand straight into the economy
to then light up business well i guess
the aim with the federal government was
that that money would trickle down
the victorian government has gone very
direct you know i call it
fire hose economics they really aren't
just trying to get the cash out there
as fast as they can 20 billion dollars a
year for the next
four years for infrastructure train
tunnels
hospitals contemporary art museums
you know huge mega projects as well as
really small projects
dotted out through the community and
that's before we get to kind of
social infrastructure they're spending
hundreds of millions of dollars to
employ
tutors to get children back up to speed
after they've missed two terms of school
we're seeing really direct stimulus so
if you spend
an extra dollar on top of your existing
payroll you'll get
10 cents of that back that's on top of
existing federal government stimulus
programs
so it's a very different and very direct
program and the aim is to essentially
blast victoria
into recovery and try and make that
money back and pay down
some of that debt before interest rates
change in potentially the future years
to the local share market and the asx
200 and the all ordinaries rose one
percent
over the week despite falls during the
last two sessions
martin lacoste from macquarie wealth
management joined me for more on markets
martin it's been a bumper month what's
been driving all that growth
yeah it certainly has it looks like
we're up about 11 since the beginning
of november but when you think of what's
happened this month
uh certainly in terms of risks for
markets to perceive
you've had a u.s election so all of that
noise is now gone
and even the the idea of what the result
might be it was deemed as a risk
the announcements through the month
around uh vaccines being approved and
the potential of
vaccines being available next year is
certainly been
a big one for global financial markets
there's no doubt about that
and then domestically here we've had the
reserve bank cutting interest rates
uh adding additional liquidity into the
economy
and i think those sort of factors have
helped to drive the market
along with the fact towards the end of
this month it does appear now the
the economy is starting to open up again
with the reopening of borders next month
and i think that's just boosted
confidence generally do you think we'll
see the traditional
santa rally then that we are so used to
in december
well let's not get too greedy i mean
maybe we've just had um
but i i think the markets are well
supported by low interest rates and
those factors that i've just mentioned
and typically but not every year but
typically we do tend to get a new year
rally don't we
next week we'll get a reading on gdp of
course we've had two quarters of
negative growth are you expecting the
tide to turn
it does look like from all the
components that make up gdp that we're
going to have growth
uh in the in the green so a positive
level between two and a half
and three percent we've seen a pickup in
consumer spending
uh we've seen a modest improvement in
construction
uh the government spending is a factor
as well uh the component that was a bit
disappointing or we think will be
disappointing is business investment
that looks like it's still
running uh around a sort of negative two
or three percent uh but
broadly speaking some of those key
components that contribute to growth
are definitely on the improve of course
even if we do go back to growth levels
that we saw in 2019 they weren't
particularly
optimal or the best position we could
have been in no growth certainly was
probably sub-optimal for our economy
there was excess capacity
in a whole range of industries and
segments and employment there's no doubt
about that
but we did go into covert in a very
strong financial position
with a let's call it a balanced budget
by the government
and our debt to gdp was around 22
percent which
we had been pretty stable for some time
we know that's changed this has been a
crisis
uh but it may well be that this is quite
significant amount of stimulatory action
by both the reserve bank
and the government may in fact drive
growth higher
over the next couple of years and the
potential of an overlay
of some uh ongoing structural reform
with our economy
may also be a growth driver now we get
to see that pan out
let's get through this crisis first but
i think that yeah it's possible
that we might end up seeing that in two
or three years time uh
we are above the 2019 growth levels
which had been
a bit soft that would be good news
martin lacoste thanks very much
always a pleasure thank you news of
vaccine progress and lockdown
restrictions lifting has
buoyed travel stocks but on the flip
side are the lockdown beneficiaries
furniture retailers like temple and
webster supermarkets and dominoes
but is the market being too simplistic
and have household heroes
got further to go elise morgan spoke to
jeffrey's analyst
michael simotis i don't think anything's
changed
in the short to medium term for
consumers the reality is notwithstanding
that very positive news on
potential vaccines for covert 19.
consumer behavior over the next 12
months will still be very different to
what it was
prior to covert so for example
australians prior to covert spent 110
billion dollars per year
on leisure travel roughly half of that
was international
that's not happening in the next 12
months
we think that there'll be a 60 billion
dollar tailwind in fy 21
from reduced leisure travel and at least
a 30 billion tailwind in fy22
that money is likely to find a new home
in
other expenditure categories and so far
consumers have shown a propensity to
want to spend that money on
household goods leisure goods etc so
what about the likes of temple and
wetzer which has been such a star
um the likes of jb hi-fi kogan
have we bought enough electronics have
we bought enough cushions and
and rugs to see those companies just
really have hit their limits
look from the numbers we've seen
recently demand is still very
strong i think consumers have money to
spend they've got time to think about
what they want to spend money on and
they want content in their lives so look
i think we will see
continued demand for those sorts of
categories there has been
a shift towards online purchasing and
some of those online pure play
businesses
or multi-channel businesses which have
large
online presence have benefited from a
valuation perspective
and perhaps the markets made the
decision that those valuations got ahead
of themselves
but in terms of demand for products in
those housing categories i think we'll
see continued strength and the stocks
where valuations are attractive on that
basis i think will continue to perform
well
retail isn't isn't a great space for
many
what on the market-wise what are you
wary of so
we're wary about valuation so for us
businesses which are performing well and
have a good outlook
but are trading at a reasonable
valuation i think of the way to play
this so harvey norman is our top pick in
the discretionary retail space it's the
cheapest discretionary retailer we cover
there's significant property on the
balance sheet which is a nice backstop
when things do
start to slow and it trades at a
discount to its listed peers so i think
that's
a business which will or share a stock
which will benefit from
the strong earnings growth that will
come through supermarkets
were also quite positive valuations for
coals and woolworths are
reasonably elevated but these are stocks
that have always tended to be expensive
in the australian market
and we get some comfort from the fact
that those large covert related costs
are in the base and they'll start to
dissipate over time
money out of thin air that's the concept
behind
value capture currently when land is
rezoned the owners get
a windfall gain value capture takes some
of that
to pay for the projects in melbourne's
outer suburbs a 150 million dollar
stadium is being built without
any help from state or federal
governments daniel ziffer reports
in its first year western united has
been kicking
goals
soon they'll have a place to call home
the field of dreams we call it because
it takes a lot of vision to think that
one day there'll be a major sporting
precinct out here
i'm here in the fast growing western
suburbs of melbourne
about 20 minutes by train from the city
in this paddock in two years there'll be
a 15 000 seat football stadium
a commercial area and it'll be filling
up with homes
the interesting thing is how the local
government is going to pay for it
there's no state government money no
federal government money
they're making the money to finance the
stadium
essentially out of thin air
[Music]
it's called value capture when
governments make
infrastructure decisions like the
location of a stadium
or subway nearby landowners get a
windfall gain
different value capture models take a
share of that windfall
and return it to the public in australia
it's largely the case that the public
funds the infrastructure
and private land holders who live nearby
take the windfalls and that has to
change western united was given this
paddock by their local council
they've sold parcels of the land for far
more than they could for
normal farmland and that money will pay
for the 150 million dollar stadium
we're providing at no cost the piece of
land which is about
six and a half hectares for the stadium
itself the rest of it
anything that the developer wants to
develop on they pay for
they use the profit to pay for the
stadium the system is common in hong
kong
and has helped finance the massive new
crossrail tunnel
under london value capture closes that
loop so that
those who have the best location who
have the greatest windfall gains
actually contribute more back to
the public coffers than those who live
two three four kilometers away and
that's the common sense
element of it we can't keep going to our
state and federal governments and saying
you build it for us so
part of the value capture idea that
we've been working on down here is how
can we help with the infrastructure
build
property groups are less enthused about
a potential new tax on land
people who are participating in the
property industry consumers
people who buy dwellings people who are
tenants in commercial buildings they are
paying enough in taxes
they pay 45 percent of state revenue
they pay 25 of a new dwelling in the
green fields that's enough tax they're
already paying enough
in the same way that any developer when
they build a new housing estate
makes money off it usually goes into the
shareholders pocket instead of it going
into the shareholder's pocket the profit
it actually goes to pay the financing
that's used
to build the stadium itself in the last
year of our property boom
in 2017-18 land values in australia went
up over 660 billion dollars in one
single year
now if just a tiny skerrick of that went
back to government
we'd be able to build all the
infrastructure we needed
capturing that cash could build a lot
more fields of drains
west united leading by three goals to
one
just before the break and that's all
from close of business
i'm rachel papasoni thanks for watching
[Music]
if we don't learn we are condemned to
make the same mistakes the spanish flew
in australia
it was often called the forgotten
pandemic and the striking parallels
today
they shut the schools and places of
gathering the states shut their borders
straight away amazed at the resemblance
australian story special encore
monday abc this week on news breakfast
powder finger front man bernard fanning
joins us to talk about the return of
live music
including the arena show he'll be
headlining in march
and five six seven eight they gave us
one of the ear worms of the 90s i'll be
speaking to british fans steps all the
way from the uk
see you then
[Music]
grandstand summer of cricket is here
live and ad free
as australia face off against fierce
rivals india
get all the action from the one day
internationals the t20s and the test
series
grandstand summer of cricket live on abc
radio
and the abc listen app the abc
belongs to you something like the abc
gives you a sense of national pride
radio australia if you'd like to join us
the abc is very much a part of
australian culture
as far back as i can remember it was the
abc
standby for the opening night hello
there and good evening
i had watched play school since i can
remember
the abc has been around for as long as
anyone who is alive remembers
creates our shared memories
it is invaluable did you hear that
it's been there since my childhood
it gives voice to all of us the abc has
always been there
like a very reliable friend
[Music]
today federal police crack an alleged
child care fraud ring
worth millions
[Music]
also ahead south australia victoria and
new south wales swelter through a
weekend heat wave
adelaide video game designers help young
people prepare for natural disasters
the sydney thunder prepared to take on
melbourne stars in tonight's wbbl
final
hello and welcome to abc news i'm miriam
corower
five people have been arrested in
melbourne accused of conspiring with
family day care providers to steal
millions of dollars of child care
subsidy and coronavirus government
payments
reporter nicole asher has more from
melbourne fps speaking today have
described this lavish
lifestyle led by the owner of prime
family daycare services here in
melbourne
they say that they there was uh
australian and international properties
there was a maserati and bmws
all owned by 42 year old older ola ooda
and 47 year old amjad shahada
now they're a doncaster east couple
accused of being
at the center of this fraud syndicate
now them
and three others are accused of using
the child care subsidy
and the job keeper payment to defraud
the federal government of up to
15 million dollars now they have said
that prime family daycare is one of the
biggest claimants of the childcare
subsidy in australia
and uh in 10 simultaneous raids over
this week they have uh
established that uh there's
suitable accusations that um they've
stolen money and they have been facing
court but here's what the afp had to say
earlier
operation iris ayton commenced in
december
19 after a large number of community
reports
of suspicious activity were made to the
department of education
skills and employment and we thank the
community for those reports
and nicole what will be the next steps
in this case
so the five uh faced court and were
given bail this week they're due back in
court in june next year the afp
says that it'll take months to sift
through the tens of thousands of
documents they've seized as part of
those 10 warrants
those warrants happened across
melbourne's northern northern suburbs
and
the sydney suburb of bankstown where an
accountant is based
they're also speaking to 70 people
linked to
the family daycare providers so they're
both educators and families
they have pieces there are chances that
more charges will be laid
a man has died in waters off south
australia's york peninsula
police helicopters and boats were sent
to brown's beach around 11 o'clock this
morning
after reports a man had fallen from
rocks into the sea
the man aged in his 30s was pulled from
the water about two hours later but
could not be revived
the bureau of meteorology says sydney
could hit 40 degrees today with strong
north-westerly winds keeping any coastal
breweries reprieve at bay
reporter ronnie heyman has more from
maroubra beach in sydney it's pretty
safe to say that it is sweltering out
here at maroubra beach today
there is a massive presence of people
here down on the sand
and those temperatures that we've been
hearing about this severe heat wave
that's flowing through
sydney at the moment and most of new
south wales those temperatures are
up in the 40s at the moment now we heard
from the bureau of meteorology just
earlier
here's what they had to say about that
some places in
inland new south wales will most likely
see their hottest november
overnight temperature in our records
and um there's also most likely a
scattering of
daytime places day-to-day time records
over the next couple of days as well
hard to beat the heat on a day like this
rani when
can sydney and kansas city in fact
expect a bit of relief from the heat
over the weekend well we are expecting
these
severe uh heat conditions for today
and tomorrow we are expecting a
southerly change to come through at some
point
tomorrow afternoon according to the
bureau of meteorology
but right now it is very hot here in
sydney
tomorrow will be much the same so that's
what we have to look forward to this
weekend
let's turn to victoria and check on
conditions there reporter chris hester
has more from mildura in the state's
northwest
it's forecast to reach a top of 45
degrees so far in mildura the top
temperature
we've got to it was 42.9 so we've still
got a couple more degrees to go
it is edging quite close to the hottest
november day on record here at mildura
that was back
around the same time of november in 2012
but we're probably forecast to fall just
a bit short of that
it's also hot in swan hill very similar
temperatures but further south
even in the wimmera district which isn't
that far away there is a bit of a breeze
shielding them from the worst of the
heat today
okay and what about concerns regarding
fire conditions
it is a severe fire danger day here in
the mallee there are total fire bans in
place
for the mali wimmera and northern
country districts
now the cfa yesterday district 18 issued
a warning for
farmers during the busy grain harvest
and they've really asked farmers not to
harvest between the hours of 1 pm
and 7 pm that warning applies to the
mildura swan hill
bulok and northern part of the yerry
ambiak shires
it is of course a bumper grain harvest
but they are worried about those winds
there is a chance of some thunderstorms
and some dusty conditions
picking up as the cool change moves in
across the northwest of victoria a
little later on today
so well with the heat still climbing
there in mildura are people heading to
the murray river to cool off
unfortunately late yesterday a a red
alert was issued
for a small section of the murray but
it's the section of the murray that
includes the mildura urban area between
the lock 11
and the chaffee bridge and that warning
was for blue green algae they're doing
some testing
to confirm the high levels of algae that
have been detected so the murray river
at the moment
is empty there are a few people cooling
off at a splash park behind me
but a nearby cafe has also closed its
doors on what would normally be the
busiest day of the week they've shut
at midday so i think people will be
mainly just keeping out of the sun and
staying inside
tough times okay so chris you mentioned
there a cool change
expected just how much might that see
temperatures drop once it comes through
it should be quite significant we're
forecast to reach top of 29 tomorrow
which will be welcome relief
after a couple of days in a row of 40
plus degree conditions
warming up again into next week a couple
of days in the
but that will be a world cooler than
what we've experienced the past couple
of days
total fire bans are in place for large
areas of south australia today with the
country fire service monitoring the far
grounds near templars
north of adelaide the fire there was
contained yesterday but residents have
been warned
the district is still smoke affected
flare-ups are possible
and they should avoid entering the
immediate area temperatures are
predicted to sit in the 40s for more
than 20 towns and cities in the state
with a top temperature of 47 expected in
central parts
we're asking people in all areas of the
state today to be prepared
have their bushfire survival plan
updated
and today is the day to enact that
bushfire survival plan to ensure
their family and their friends know what
to do well ahead of a fire starting
and then unfortunately if a fire does
start um implement that plan as quickly
as possible because
with the types of conditions we see
today fires will be fast moving
and potentially put communities and
lives at threat
south australia has recorded two new
cases of coronavirus bringing the
parafield cluster to
33. a child who's a member of the
original family linked to the cluster
tested positive
overnight after returning two negative
tests the other case is a man in his 30s
who was a casual contact of a previous
case
the man and his family will be moved to
a medi hotel
there are 5 800 people currently in
quarantine in adelaide with 19 active
cases of covid19
in south australia
investigations are continuing into the
death of a three-year-old girl in
townsville police say the toddler died
from heat exposure after she was
allegedly left in a car
at a property for a considerable period
of time yesterday
the girl's 37 year old mother laura
peverell and her 29 year old partner
aaron hill
have been charged with manslaughter
their cases were mentioned in court this
morning
both matters are adjourned until next
month and the couple has been remanded
in custody the prime minister